Monolithic - SOA - Microservices:

.Monolithic Architecture: traditional unified model for the design of a software program, being a large single software which continuously grows with a tightly coupled architecture, each component must be present in order for code to be executed or compiled. With such complexity scaling of individual features of the monolith is almost impossible but the entire app can achieve scaling by manual deployment as a new instance of the monolith on another server with a load balancer

.SOA Architecture: SOA(Service Oriented Architecture) is an approach for defining, linking and integrating reusable business services. These services communicate with each other to enable simple data passing or it could involve two or more services coordinating activity. The complexity of each service within SOA is usually very low and they communicate with each other over a set of APIs.

.Microservices architecture: consists of a collection of small services. Each service is self-contained and should implement a single business module with seperated codebase, which can be managed by a small development team. Services can be deployed independently which updates an existing service without rebuilding and redeploying the entire application communicating with each other using APIs, internal implementation details of each service are hidden from other services

.Containers: are an application-centric method to deliver high-performing, scalable applications on any infrastructure of your choice. Containers are best suited to deliver microservices by providing portable, isolated virtual environments for applications to run without interference from other running applications

.Container Orchestration: tools which group systems together to form clusters where containers deployment and management is automated at a scale while meeting the requirements mentioned above


.What is Kubernetes?
Kubernetes is an open-source system for automating deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications, is also referred to as k8s (Kates) written in go language. Containerization help package software for availability and deployment enabling applications to be released and updated without downtime.

.Create a cluster:
kind is a tool for running local kubernetes cluster using docker
install go, kind, docker, minikube, kubectl

what is a cluster?

A group of machines that kubernetes manages together to run the app in containers, kubernetes coordinates a highly available cluster of computers that are connected to work as a single unit. Kubernetes automates the distribution and scheduling of apps containers across a cluster in a more efficient way

cluster consists of two types of resources:
.Control Plane coordinates the cluster
.Nodes are the workers that run application

Control Plane is responsible for managing the cluster(scheduling, maintaining applications desired state, scaling and rolling out new updates)

A node is a vm or physical computer that serves as a worker machine in a kubernetes cluster, each node has kubelet(agent for managing node communicating with kubernetes control plane using Kubernetes API). Node should have tools for handling container operations as containerd