I’m a student from Lebanon and want to learn Cybersecurity. I am certain that it will be beneficial for my work. But I have got no job of my own to carry the expenses to pay . It is very difficult for me to gather such amount of money for the certificate. I am from Lebanon, a country that is tackling a financial crisis, inflation, and electricity outage. The cost of living expenses is getting higher and it is apparent that our income is not enough to cover this situation. I couldn’t manage any other extra income that might support my learning expenses. The government pays little attention to us in terms of education, social amenities, livelihood, and other benefits we should enjoy as citizens. Financial Aid will help me take this course without any adverse impact on my monthly essential needs. So I’m badly in need of this financial aid. I want to take this course as I want to learn. This course will boost my job prospects after graduation from my institute. It will help me perform better in understanding and learning this technology and give me an edge over my competitors. A verified certificate will attach credibility to the certificate I receive from this course. I plan to complete all assignments on or before time. I also plan to grade assignments that are to peer-reviewed which I believe will an invaluable learning opportunity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\
My major professional objective is continuing to learn. I sincerely desire to learn new things and advance in my work. Cybersecurity requires continuous learning and development. By enrolling in this course, I will be able to study cybersecurity and put it into practice. It could enable me to increase my knowledge. I will learn how to define cybersecurity and how to safeguard systems and networks from potential threats thanks to this training. I'm eager to explore subjects like network security, ethical hacking, and risk analysis. I want to have a solid foundation in security implementation and cybersecurity concepts. Identifying the cybersecurity elements that stand out to us as being the most crucial and necessary leaving knowing a lot about where cybersecurity is heading, what it does, and how to get ready for it.I can learn more thanks to this cybersecurity training. In the past, taking courses on Coursera considerably improved my grasp of networking and security.
