Required to automate an infrastructure to manage all the running services from one place.

CM(configuration management): is a system engineering method that ensures a product's characteristics remain consistent during its life cycle, it provides a configuration model of the services, assets, and infrastructure by recording the relationships between service assets and configuration items(CI)
It also ensures that releases into controlled environments and operational use are completed on the basis of formal approvals. Configuration management may cover non-IT assets, work products used to develop the services, and configuration items required to support the services that are not formally classified as assets. Any change in configuration can dramatically impact: Peformance, Security, Functionality. Any component that requires management to deliver an IT service is considered part of the scope of configuration management. This process maintains information about any CI required to deliver an IT service, including its relationships and this information is managed throughout the life cycle of the CI. 
Configuration Management is to define and control the components of an IT service and its infrastructure, and maintain accurate configuration information. The configuration management application identifies, defines and tracks an organization's configuration items by creating and managing records for those items. Other service manager applications can then access these records from a central repository

_Roles of configuration management tools:
Configuration management tools allow modifications and deployments to be faster, repeatable, scalable, predictable and able to maintain the desired state, ehich brings controlled assets into an expected states.

Advantages of using configuration management tools include:

.Increase the efficiency with a well-defined configuration process that improves visibility and provides control with the help of tracking. 

.Optimize cost by having detailed knowledge of all the IT elements, which helps to avoid unnecessary duplication.

.Track requirements from specification to testing

.Identify and control software versions

.Enhances system and process reliability by detecting effects

.Manage the information about the configuration items

.Provides faster restoration of your service if a process failure occurs

.Facilitate the conduct of functional configuration audits

_Popular configuration management tools:
.Saltstack: Python-based open source configuration management tool used to remotely manage configuration items
.Ansible: Python-based configuration management tool considered as agentless configuration management tool
.Chef: Ruby-based configuration management tool having integration with most of the cloud-based platforms
.Puppet: Ruby DSL-based configuration management tool used for managing software, systems and network configuration items

_Ansible Overview:
.Ansible is an IT automation engine that automates cloud provising, configuration management, application deployment, intra-service orchestration, and a variety of other IT tasks.

.Ansible was built from the ground up for multi-tiered deployments and instead of controlling one system at a time, it models your IT architecture by defining how all of your systems interact.

.Ansible uses playbook to describe automation jobs, which are written in YAML(human-readable data serialization language which is mainly used for configuration files)

.Ansible designed for multi-tiered deployment.

.Ansible models IT infrastructure by interrelating all the systems, It was constructed for multi-level use from the ground up.

_Ansible components:

Instead of logging into each of these remote nodes and carrying out your tasks, you can comfortably do so from a central location and comfortably manage your servers. This is benefical when you want to maitain consistency in application deployment, reduce human error and automating repetitive and somewhat mundane tasks

Six components of Ansible:
.Modules: Ansible connects to nodes and sends scripts known as Ansible modules, User can write their own modules, most modules accept parameters that define the system's desired state, Ansible runs these modules by default over SSH and removes them when they are finished.
.Modules utilities: Ansible stores function as module utilities when several modules use the same code, to reduce duplication and maitenance. However, only python or powershell can be used to build module utilities.
.Plugins: Ansible's core functionality is augmented by plugins, plugins execute on the control node within the /usr/bin/ansible method, while modules execute on the target system in seperate processes, usually on a remote system. Ansible comes with many useful plugins and can also be created
.Inventory: It is a configuration file where user defines the host information, it is a text file that contains a list of servers or nodes that the user manages and configures. Usually, the servers are listed based on their host names or IP addresses.
.Playbooks: Ansible playbook is a blueprint for automation tasks, which are complex IT tasks with no human intervention, The playbooks are simply frameworks or pre-written code that developers can use as a starting point.IT infrastructure, networks, security systems, and developer personas are all routinely automated using Ansible playbooks, the scripts or instructions are written in YAML format.
.Ansible search path: Modules, module utilities, plugins, playbooks, and tasks can all be stored in different locations stored in different locations, several files with similar or identical names in different locations can be available on the Ansible control node, search path decides which of these files Ansible can find and use.

_YAML scripting:
YAML syntax is simpler for humans to read and write than other popular data formats like XML and JSON.
Further, there are libraries available in most programming languages for working with YAML, Ansible uses it to express Ansible playbooks.
For Ansible, nearly every YAML file starts with a list, every item in the list is a key or value pair list, also known as a hash or dictionary
Every YAML file optionally starts with (---) and ends with (...)
Example of YAML file:
---
   james:
      name:james john
      rollNo: 34
      div: B
      sex: male
...

Rules when creating YAML file:
When you are creating a file in YAML, you should remeber the following basic, YAML is case-sensitive, the files should have (.yaml) as the extension. YAML does not allow the use of tabs while creating YAML files spaces are allowed instead.

 



